(upbeat music)
Well, I guess first I want to say
that every student is special.
And I want to get that out first before saying,
but some students are more special than others.
(audience laughs)
When I first heard about Angela,
it was during her undergraduate years,
and that's unusual to begin with,
when you hear about a student who's not even,
hadn't even applied to graduate school yet.
But I did know about a student
who was working on the Black Panther Party
and was doing very interesting work.
And I knew immediately that there would be a real scramble
for somebody who is outstanding
and they graduated with honors from Harvard
and wanting to go on graduate school.
And it just seemed
that here was someone who was not only a great student
but someone who seemed to have a real vision.
And I think that's what made her very special,
someone who had a notion
about where to apply her talents
to make a real contribution that was unique
and distinctive and important.
And that was certainly the case with Angela.
When she was working on a thesis
on the women in the Black Panther Party,
a subject that had not really received a great deal
of attention and one that required a great deal
of originality that you can do the research.
You had to go out and find the people,
and a lot of them were spread throughout the country.
But clearly Angela was able to do that.
Once it clear that Stanford was among the places
that she was considering for graduate school,
I think I would have offered just about anything
to Stanford to offer to get her to come here.
But I think probably the most important thing
we offered was the possibility
of bringing the Black Panther papers here to Stanford,
which was being discussed at that time.
And to me, this has been a really perfect fit
of having a person who is, I think, the worldwide expert
on the Black Panther Party, even as a graduate student
and having the most important collection here at Stanford.
And I think that Angela has not only taken advantage
of this possibility but really made the most of it
now as director of the Black Panther Research Project,
which has been established on this campus
and has already become the center for research
on the Black Panther Party and her forthcoming thesis,
which I hope will quickly be turned into a book
on the subject, I think will reshape
what people think about the Panthers.
Although there is a lot of people know something
about the Black Panther Party through its notoriety,
there's been actually very little
significant scholarly research,
and no scholarly book has been written
on the Black Panther Party to date.
So this is an area that I think we need a great deal
of research and I can't think of anyone more qualified
to do it than Angela.
So here is Angela.
(audience applauds)
Thank you very much.
I don't know what my talk is going to sound like
after that introduction, (laughs) but I'll do my best.
First I want to say good afternoon to everyone here,
and I'm so pleased that so many of you came out
during lunchtime to essentially hear a history lecture.
What's really interesting though
is that as Professor Carson said,
I don't just think of what I do as history.
I also try to find the lessons that can be learned
from the research that I do to apply to life today.
And with that in mind,
I'd like to ask you to not just hear the information,
the dates and the details,
but think about the issues and the concepts
that surround some of the material
that I talk about and really see how it applies
to your life that you've lived in the past, now,
younger people you might know,
older people you might know,
just move outside of your box that we're normally in
when we think about material that is new and different.
Before I begin my official talk,
I'd like to ask for a little audience participation.
What I'd like to know personally is what came to mind,
and I just need three or four bold volunteers
to let me know what came to mind
when they read the title of my talk,
and the title is "From Babies for the Revolution
"to Planned Parenthood: The Transformation
"of the Black Panther Party
"Female Revolutionary 1966 to 1982."
So what's the first thing you thought?
What'd you expect to hear?
Yes.
I thought I really wanted to hear it,
because I've always wondered what happened to the women
of the Black Panther Party.
I wonder if they got buried as much as most women
of revolutionary parties.
Okay.
I thought of Ericka Huggins
and Elaine Brown, wanted to know about them.
Because those were the women
that I was aware of in the '60s.
Okay.
Yes.
Actually, I thought of Angela Davis
and how she's gone from being a fugitive
to a respected professor and author,
and I wondered what happened to the other women.
Because you only hear, I only hear about her
and I don't care about the others.
Right, okay.
One more.
I thought of Burmese and labor production.
Very interesting.
Okay.
Well,
I've written a couple other articles
that deal specifically and in more detail
with all of those issues.
And today's talk won't be exactly
what at least the people who expressed are expecting
or thought when they immediately saw the title
of the topic.
But again, as I said, with the information,
you'll be able to have a larger idea
of what exactly was going on
during a particular point in time on a particular topic.
I'd like everyone to bear in mind what they just heard,
think about each of your own ideas,
and open your mind to information I'm about to present.
I'll spend about 30 minutes or so talking specifically
about Black Panther Party women and their transformation.
In between, I'll include about a five-minute clip,
a video clip of a former female Black Panther Party member,
Ericka Huggins actually, who's reflecting
on some of her experiences in the organization
as it relates to reproduction
and gender roles and differences in national chapters.
And then finally,
I'll spend the remaining time answering questions,
any questions you might have.
The primary intent of my discussion
is to trace the transformation
of Black Panther Party women
through three phases that I've identified to date.
The first I identify as woman as vessel, woman as nurturer,
covering the years between 1968 and 1970.
At this point, Black Panther Party women were seen
as a conduit for the continuation of the race.
Additionally, they were supporters and nurturers
for the male members that saw them as objects.
There were large numbers of Black Panther Party deaths.
Anti and voluntary sterilization sentiment was rampant
among party members,
and the members were primarily under the age of 20 years.
The second stage I call the transitional woman,
dynamic woman phase between 1971 and 1977.
The concept of the revolutionary Black woman is
in serious flux regarding the woman's primary roles
as nurturers and supporters.
Organizationally, there's less funding
to support the additional children
that need to be fed and cared for.
In 1971, a serious round of party centralization takes place
causing a high concentration
of highly effective female organizers to concentrate
in one area, that being Oakland, California.
During the later years of this phase,
finances improved slightly.
The women become more mature due to natural age increase
and planned parenthood begun in earnest
during 1972 reaches fruition.
The final phase, which includes the years 1977 to 1982
are slightly more difficult to describe.
Perhaps the woman as organizer,
woman as asexual being best describes this phase
of Black Panther Party history.
This phase is characterized by the height
of female leadership and organizing
and simultaneously by women's renewed discussion
of the restrictive dating policy applied to women
and letters suggesting, letters from these female members
to Huey Newton, the organization's leader,
suggesting a painful feeling of isolation
and lack of sex appeal
to non-Black Panther Party community members.
My concern today follows the yearlong theme,
public policy, private lives.
Instead of focusing on national
or local legislation that might have had an impact
on women in the Black Panther Party,
I decided to focus on the intraorganizational policies
that had an impact on the private lives of these women.
Some of the policies were known
to the surrounding communities
within which these activists organized, others were not.
Nevertheless, all decisions made had a direct
or indirect effect on the female leadership.
I'm sorry, female membership,
which would include the leadership as well
as the rank and file.
With the exception of people
from the San Francisco Bay Area,
many people have no idea what the Black Panther Party was.
The Black Panther Party was an organization composed
of a contingent of lower and middle class African Americans
that sent waves throughout the world
initially with their call
for armed self-defense against police harassment.
The BPP was co-founded on October 15, 1966
by Huey P. Newton and Bobby Seale in Oakland, California,
in the West Oakland Poverty Center office.
That office doubled as Seale's place of employment.
On that day, the co-founders drafted a document
they named the Ten-Point Platform and Program.
This charter called for freedom and land,
improved housing, economics, education
and police relations, as well as a UN-supervised plebiscite
for African Americans to convene
and determine the parameter of their national destiny.
By 1970, the Black Panther Party had expanded
to greater than 40 chapters
and branches locally, nationally, and worldwide.
Although no official records exist,
several former high ranking leaders have stated
that at its height
the Black Panther Party had thousands of members.
While the BPP was intended
as an all-male organization from its creation,
within two years, females represented approximately 60%
of the party's membership.
Between 1968 and 1982,
the Black Panther Party developed greater
than 50 community programs,
the majority of which were coordinated
and staffed by female members.
The years between 1974 and 1977 were the most crucial
for women programmatically.
With women at the organization's helm
during these years, the Black Panther Party
implemented its largest number
of new community programs, approximately 30,
and became intimately involved in local electoral politics.
Furthermore, at any given moment after 1968
when the organization expanded its focus
to include community organizing,
females continued to represent the majority
of the membership.
Therefore, it is crucial to understand the variety
of roles they performed between 1966 and 1982,
because they represented the largest percentage
of the membership.
While they were not always the decision-makers
to an extent that reflected their numbers,
they were influential in many decisions that were made.
Additionally, they received the greatest fallout
from many of those same group policies.
Before we can understand the Black Panther Party
women's experiences, we must account for the fact
that Black Panther Party women were not a monolithic group
with monolithic experiences.
They were divided or united by regional upbringing,
economic background, differing educational levels
and diverging ages to name only a few categories.
During the earliest years of the Black Panther Party,
during the earliest years,
the Black Panther Party was a nationalist organization
with race as a primary category for organizing.
The unique aspect of their group, however,
was their eventual willingness
to incorporate an economic component into their analysis
to compliment the traditional race-based approach.
When you combine these components with the fact
that during 1968 and 1969 local
and federal law enforcement attacked the group most
with at least 30 members dying during 1969,
it becomes clear why both male
and female party members would begin to call for replacement
of the dying members.
And the myths of constant raids by police,
FBI telephone and visual surveillance
and the tenor of the times
that a revolution was just around the corner,
the Black Panther Party members, the majority
of whom were younger than 20 years decided to birth babies
for the revolution to ensure that the struggle will continue
in the event that they were killed.
This was never an official policy
in the sense that there's no evidence
of a directive to the various chapters.
However, personal letters and articles were published
in the Black Panther Party newspaper
that by 1969 had an international distribution.
According to Black Panther Party member Deborah Johnson,
the fiancee of Fred Hampton,
the recently assassinated 1969 and renowned chairman
of the Illinois chapter of the Black Panther Party,
the role of the revolutionary Black woman was
to reproduce Black revolutionaries
to challenge the inequalities of the social system.
Similarly, another female Panther argued
that once a Black woman has reached a certain level
of awareness of the needs
of her family and of her children, quote,
"She then becomes an artist existing solely
"for the the purpose of helping the Black man
"achieve the heights of his ambition."
The art in the Black Panther community
news service newspaper also reflected the concept
of the revolutionary Black family.
The fact that these items were published
with no articles to rebut the concept
suggested to the public at least
that this was an official organizational policy.
An example of the belief
that woman was a vessel is an analysis
of Bobby Seale's discussion of the way the party used women
as organizing tools in the early years
and also a phrase Eldridge Cleaver referred to
during his campaign for president
on the Peace and Freedom Party ticket in 1968.
The phrase he used was pussy power.
In both leaders' minds,
women could be used strategically to attract men
to the party who probably would not join on their own.
Physical attraction would be the primary bait.
While Bobby Seale wrote about it
in his first party publication called "Seize the Time:
"The Story of Huey Newton and the Black Panther Party"
published during '69, Eldridge Cleaver publicly spoke
about this concept wherever he went
during his 1968 campaign.
While not all women,
all Black Panther Party women agreed with this policy,
there is no evidence
that anyone told him to stop using the concept publicly.
It is important to note here
that not all women agreed with
or adhered to unofficial party policies.
Older females and those with strong personalities
resisted any attempts to categorize them
and force them to do things
with which they did not agree.
For example, Elaine Brown, the only woman
in the party to rise to the highest organizational position
as chairman recalled that she always had used birth control
despite what any unofficial
or official organizational policies had been.
Health reports for other members
that I've located in the collection
in the Huey P. Newton papers supports this
with references to women's choices to have abortions,
intrauterine devices, IUDs,
and to use birth control pills as options.
And at this point I'd like to stop and let you listen
to Ericka Huggins, who begins by talking
about her husband, her former husband, John Huggins,
who had been killed in 1969 during an altercation
at UCLA between the Panthers and US members.
So that's where she begins.
But then she'll discuss a specific experience
that she had when she traveled from the Los Angeles chapter
where she originally joined in '68 to the Bay Area chapter.
When I first, let's see in 1960,
well, John was killed on January 17th of 1969
here on UCLA's campus.
John Huggins was one amazing man.
And I don't say that because I'm biased.
He was my friend before he was my lover,
and he remains to be my friend.
He was a man who took a bath with rubber duckies.
(audience laughs)
See, we don't like to admit how we really live, okay.
We like to act like we all are on some pedestals
and that nothing we do stinks, and we don't cry,
and we don't get scared
in the middle of the night, and we do.
He took a bath with rubber duckies
and he loved his daughter who he only knew for three weeks.
And he told me something once.
He said, "It is impossible to make revolution in society
"if you don't make first revolution in yourself."
True, it's true.
He told me that.
I was 19 years old and pregnant with our daughter
and I have never forgotten it.
And it stays with me.
And it is the, it is the jumping off place inside myself
that I do my own inner work.
I wanted to say that
when I was pregnant with Mai, she'll be 26 in December,
when I was pregnant with Mai,
I walked into a party house and we had all these houses
where we lived collectively,
men, women, children, everybody.
And this was in Oakland right around the corner
from the national headquarters office,
which you'll see in one of these pictures over here
on the wall.
And we were eating dinner.
Well, the women,
and see, this was not a role we allowed ourselves
to be relegated to.
The women had cooked the dinner, which was very sweet.
I didn't think very much of it.
Elaine and I were standing there together.
And the men were sitting in the front room,
and we thought that was a little odd,
because in Los Angeles,
everybody cooked everything and everybody ate.
And then I walked toward the kitchen
with my belly, like, way big.
I walked toward the kitchen to get food for us.
And someone said to me, "Sister,
"you gonna have to wait 'cause the men eat first."
(audience laughs)
I couldn't believe I was hearing this.
And then I heard conversation
about we make the next warriors for the revolution.
No we don't.
(audience laughs)
I'm saying that that doesn't come from the party.
That was not something that Huey Newton, Bobby Seale,
or David Hilliard ever put out as a way
in which we would behave or believe.
That came as a response to virulent oppression
and trying to reclaim something of Africa
and trying to have a culture that wasn't one of slavery.
However, it didn't work,
because my baby and I were going to eat first and we did.
And the men in that house were very angry
with Elaine and I for stepping out of our place.
And we continued to do that,
and we continue to still step out of our place.
And we're saying that as Maya Angelou the other night said
her grand-aunt said to her once,
she said to her sister, "You got to stand out on the word."
Well, we all need to be stand-up people
just like I was that day.
I didn't do that because I had some political
blah, blah, blah, blah.
I was hungry,
and the baby was hungry, and it made no sense.
So I'm giving you anecdotes to let you know,
there are these anecdotes are the answers
to all those wonderful questions that Ron mentioned.
What we need to do is go forward
with love and compassion for our people
and for ourselves.
We don't know how to love ourselves.
I could tell you story after story, Huey Newton's addiction,
yes, he was a dope fiend.
Huey Newton's addiction was the result
of the constant onslaught from society
and the constant onslaught from inside.
And we all have our demons to fight.
If we're going to do anything to change society,
we have to fight those demons, meet them face on.
And if we don't, we're not going to change any society.
We're not going to fight police brutality.
We're not going to do anything
except be at odds with ourselves.
That's right.
So that's all I want to say to you right now.
So as Ericka Huggins said,
there was no official policy
that there had to be babies for the revolution
and that there had to be women
who cooked the dinner all the time
and ate after the men ate.
But nevertheless, these things did go on
at local chapter levels.
The babies for the revolution concept was popular
during 1969 and 1970.
But the overall lifetime for these ideas was short-lived.
While the policy might've been lauded at the time
as a logical approach to solve the immediate urgency
of replacing the fallen comrades,
the long-term impact of such action
soon had to be confronted.
In addition to the party's loss of individuals,
there were also massive arrests during these early years.
This meant that the BPP's coffers were constantly strained
because of the need to pay bail,
particularly for those organizers
who were considered crucial to the group's fundraising
and community organizing potential.
Consequently, the lack of funds
in addition to the lack of childcare facilities
meant that women were caught in a precarious position.
Most people who joined the party survived
using the proceeds generated from newspaper sales
among other things, such as donations that were solicited
from businesses and private arenas.
However, during pregnancy and after female had the baby,
she was physically unable to provide for herself
using the same strategies.
Also Panthers nationwide continued to live
in collective housing to minimize expenses.
With the new mothers now out of commission
and unable to provide for themselves
and others in the house,
the organizational strain
at the immediate local level was clear.
The absence of childcare and funds led some women
to make decisions that they probably would not have made.
Numerous women left the organization
to take care of their children.
Deborah Johnson, the same woman
who had advocated replacing fallen Black Panther Party men
with new warriors left the party within one year
after her son's birth.
Johnson had attempted to maintain the same level
of party work after childbirth
by asking her mother to care for her infant son.
Shortly, however, she joined her son,
because she could not fathom the idea of her mother caring
for her child as the sole caregiver.
In her mind, it was her responsibility,
and she wanted to have more contact with her child.
Black Panther Party mothers during these earliest years
had realized that emphasis on motherhood
without the proper support structures in place
often meant de-emphasis of their roles
as effective community organizers.
During 1969 at a large conference in Oakland,
a core of women called
for the Black Panther Party's official recognition
that increasing numbers of women were experiencing
the same law enforcement harassment as men.
They also argued that they were beginning to see themselves
in the same critical roles as women
in armed revolts on other continents,
such as Central America and Africa.
Yet those who would become mothers also had
to face another reality, minimal structural support
beneath the veneer of revolutionary ideology.
Even before numerous women became mothers,
they had to deal with the reality
that Black Panther Party revolutionary ideas
and practices were biologically alienating for them.
The Black Panther Party took pride in the fact
that the women were trained
using the exact same military approach
of drills, for example.
Women learned to assemble, shoot,
disassemble and clean weapons.
They performed combat maneuvers,
sandbagged homes and led drill sections themselves.
Even in interviews that I conducted
with about 30 or 40 women,
they also took pride in remembering all
of those things that they had done.
Simultaneously, however, the stress
and intensity associated with these activities
and the outside pressures of constant federal
and local law enforcement surveillance led
to numerous miscarriages
and other reproductive health problems.
Of course, this is the kind of information
that you won't find
in the newspapers in the Panther newspaper or in the books.
Instead, this information was revealed to me
during personal interviews that I had done.
And I really believe that they only shared that information
with me because I was a woman, a young woman.
The transition to planned parenthood was directly connected
to the realization that changes had to be made
if the party held its future,
held its future's best interest at heart.
Yet this change only seemed possible
once large numbers of individuals were relocated
to the national headquarters in Oakland.
During the years between 1972 and 1977,
the Black Panther Party was involved
in expanding its base in Oakland.
They expanded their services
from free breakfast for school children
and other afterschool and summer programs for children
to include services for senior citizens, teens
and other non-educational programs
for the wider Oakland community.
In the midst of these changes,
the predominantly female program coordinators
were also engaged
in restructuring the internal organizational structure
to accommodate the entire Black Panther Party workforce.
Huey Newton and other supporting party leadership
redirected the organization's energies
towards establishing a firm base within the local community.
To this end, Audrea Jones proposed
and instituted a planned parenthood policy
to compliment the structural changes,
such as the 1970 creation of a childcare facility in Oakland
for Black Panther Party members' children.
Jones was one of the most dynamic
and respected local leaders who had been transferred
to Oakland from the Boston, Massachusetts chapter
where she had begun one
of several successful national Black Panther sponsored
free community health clinics.
Her specialty was in healthcare,
the division within which she worked
when she moved to Oakland.
During August 1972, Jones proposed
that the party implement a planned parenthood policy.
The impact of financial centralization became central
to the experiences of those wishing to have children.
Beginning July 1972,
the Central Committee and party members had dialogued
about a birth control policy.
Audrea Jones, an integral part of the party as staff
at the Oakland-based George Jackson Free Health Clinic
was author of a powerful document noting the need
for a shifting policy regarding birth control
and family planning.
Jones' ideological position is important
because it shows a marked shift
from the 1968 and '69 argument
that women should bear children for the revolution
and reject birth control because it was genocidal.
The document refers to the increase in births
within the party, in terms of the financial
and manpower strain it would place on the organization.
"Our experience has been one of groups
"of sisters becoming pregnant
"at approximately the same time," Jones begins.
"As a result, we have had bulk increases
"in financial expenses
"and bulk decreases in manpower during the pregnancies,
"and the childcare staffs are experiencing similar problems
"after the babies are born."
Not only did the children need financial assistance
for food and clothing
as well as shelter and healthcare provided by the party,
but more specifically, manpower was lost
for the survival programs and community outreach.
Essentially, while the mothers were pregnant,
they were not always able to remain active in the community,
a requirement for all Black Panther Party members.
This is evident in the Health Cadre Reports
for the period June 1972 through March 1973.
Under the section headings Cadre and Community
in these weekly reports, there was usually a reference
to the morale of the members
linked to whether they had the opportunity to work
outside the clinic conducting voter registration,
for instance, during the 1972-73 Bobby Seale
and Elaine Brown campaigns.
Indeed, there was a direct correlation
between high spirits and community involvement.
The converse was true regarding low morale
and low community involvement.
Most interesting was Jones' suggestion
that the Black Panther Party and the spirit
of true social equality not forced the woman
to bear the responsibility of birth control alone.
In Jones' opinion,
this was quote, "backward and unprogressive."
Yet she admitted that idea was present in the party.
In an attempt to alleviate these ideas,
Joan suggested that both women and men attend
Black Panther Party clinic-sponsored birth control classes.
These classes would not only consist of the pros and cons
of various birth control devices and methods
but also and more importantly,
the responsibility and necessity for us to do so.
Jones's issues were placed on the August 16th, 1972 agenda
of the Central Committee meeting and included quote,
"setting a policy of planned parenthood in the party,
"the establishment of a policy for expectant mothers
"and a designated period
"of recuperation after childbirth."
The party had established its goals for the upcoming years
and it was a practical, organizational necessity
to make decisions
that would keep Black Panther Party women healthy
and the party more efficient
in terms of manpower and finances.
Between April and July, there were five new babies.
And by December, there would be three more,
in addition to the 21 already at the childcare center,
the preschool component of the childcare center,
and 48 at the alternative elementary school they developed,
then known as the Intercommunal Youth Institute
but that would later go on
to be called the Oakland Community School.
This was a financial reality
for the financially strapped party.
The additional issue to be discussed
on the agenda was the relationship between party members
and the outside community regarding dating,
sexuality and reproduction.
Jones suggested that outside dating policy be clarified
and that party members not be allowed to reproduce children
with non-party members.
For Jones, ideological training was necessary
for members to understand
the full responsibilities of parenthood.
Therefore, she suggested that planned parenthood be a part
of the political education discussions.
Furthermore, Jones believed the party would benefit
from collective decision-making regarding having children,
especially since the membership was young
in age and ideologically.
In essence, she proposed a four-step process.
One, a comrade sister and brother should first decide
between themselves that they wished to have a child.
This is usually not the case.
Many of the pregnancies in our party are not planned.
Two, discussions between them and the review committee,
which would consist of responsible members
and should include finance secretary, personnel
and the ministry of health.
Number three, based upon the discussions
and the objective conditions,
the review committee would then make recommendations
to the entire Central Committee,
the Central Committee being the body of,
the select body of members that made,
that determined policy for the whole organization.
And number four,
the Central Committee would then make a decision
as to the feasibility at that time.
These were all suggestions,
party women were never forced
not to have children.
Indeed, there's evidence that women made their own decisions
about whether they would have children
by practicing some form of birth control.
By January '74, however,
Black Panther Party members were told
in a directive from Huey P. Newton
that all members should practice quote,
"some form of birth control."
While this might have seemed the practical
and logical decision to make,
numerous women were battling
with their personal desires while simultaneously laboring
for the collective.
It was difficult for them to give up all the things
they had been socialized to expect.
Katherine Campbell, a member
of the San Francisco branch left the party
on several occasions in an attempt to spend more time
with her husband, who she had met in the party and daughter.
Her husband had left the party, but she would return
because of her commitment
to the party's community service goals,
her commitment to the Oakland Community School
and her deep regard for the party as a surrogate family.
Like a woman in 1974, who had decided to return to Detroit
and have her baby instead of remaining in the party,
Campbell had spent many years of her life
searching for what family meant to her.
And at this stage, she believed
that she could find a more personal meaning
by leaving the party to focus on nuclear family living
instead of the Black Panther Party's collective lifestyle.
When JoNina Abron arrived
at party headquarters in Oakland in February
or March of 1974, there was a Central Committee directive
ordering members to practice birth control.
This was in sharp contrast to the attitude
of party leadership and many male
and female rank and file members,
who in '69 and '70 discouraged any serious discussion
of birth control
and called for the reproduction of the young warriors
for the revolution.
No longer apparently was there the immediate possibility
of an impending revolution
for which children and young adults would be needed.
All women, however, did not subscribe to the early policies.
Elaine Brown in a 1976 interview revealed
that she had always made the final decision
for her personal life.
"I never went along with that program.
"I always bought my own contraceptives."
Regarding the new attitude after 1974,
Brown recalls that quote, "Having or not having a child
"or having or not having an abortion was left
"as an individual decision."
JoNina Abron refers to another example
of a woman making her own decision
about reproduction rights.
Abron personally knew the woman member
from Detroit who had become pregnant
at the time that the directive was being circulated
among members of the Oakland branch.
Rather than abort her unborn child,
which was a suggestion that was made to the woman,
the unnamed woman decided that she would return to Detroit
to have her baby.
Deborah Johnson left the chapter,
because she could not simultaneously raise her child
and continue to work in the party full time.
And according to her: Before you were by yourself.
You could really sleep anywhere
and you could work all night,
but when you have the responsibility of children,
you can't do that.
There was no structure set up to work
within the party to continue to work
in the breakfast program, to continue to sell the newspaper.
It was the demand to do it all or nothing.
You would have to explain why you had
to go take your child to the doctor,
go through some struggle with that.
Therefore, after continuing her work,
she left the party because she,
again, did not want her mother to take full responsibility
for caring for that child.
Not only were there problems for those Panther members,
especially women who were in need of childcare facilities,
there were also reproductive problems for the women
as mentioned earlier.
And women throughout the country
in the various chapters experienced that same form
of intense pressure and physical rigor.
Although between 1970 and '73, there were childcare houses
or centers where both men and women worked,
it was not until 1973
that Newton established a school in Oakland
for the Panther children and dormitories for the children.
According to Elaine Brown,
while most party members worked every day
at their varying tasks,
some were assigned to care for and teach our children.
That was an expression of a party ideal,
that the family was the collective.
Nothing belongs to the individual,
neither money, nor housing, nor men, women, children.
Everything was part of the whole, the collective.
Therefore individuals now had a structure
within which to incorporate their family.
However, not all women felt a sense of community
and family within the BPP structure.
As late as August 1977, Black Panther Party women
were involved in discussions
and reflections regarding their relationship
to party men and non-party men.
By this point, the number
of Black Panther chapters had dwindled
to approximately four
and the total membership was less than 200.
Additionally, at least 33% of those involved were close to
or had already entered their 30s in age.
The membership was asked to respond to the issue
of whether or not Panther women should be allowed
to date men outside the party.
Overwhelmingly, those who responded believed
that women should be allowed
to date men outside the party
if these men were organizational supporters
and if they did not represent a threat of any kind
to the woman's continued involvement with the party.
This concern about not allowing women
to date men outside the party hearkened back
to those earliest days when Bobby Seale
and Eldridge Cleaver had linked a woman's drawing power
and physical appearance to their roles in the organization.
Unfortunately, almost 10 years later, after both Seale
and Cleaver had been expelled, the maintenance
of this dating policy was continuing to generate tensions
for some BPP membership.
The policy suggests that even after such a long time
women were not trusted to be able to think for themselves
and resist being drawn away from their party work.
Letters from the men on the question
of outside dating were basic notes
of support that they agreed
that women should be allowed the same privilege
of seeking outside companionship.
On the other hand,
the women were more analytical and expressive
and tapped into the emotional impact of their isolation.
One member who felt
she had had too many negative interactions with male members
who only wanted to have sex with her and nothing more
spoke of her regular consideration of lesbianism
because of her need to simply feel loved
and be treated nicely by someone.
She also spoke of community members seeing her, should I?
Okay.
She also spoke of community members seeing her
as nothing more than an automaton, an asexual workaholic.
One letter to Newton from the newspaper's editor
reflected the feelings of many women's correspondence.
And so for that reason,
I'd like to quote extensively from this.
And JoNina Abron,
the woman from the Detroit chapter
who moved to Oakland in 1974 is the author of this.
Throughout the 29 years of my life,
I have experienced the dual pain
of being a Black woman in America.
When I joined the party five years ago, I was thrilled
about becoming part of an organization that believes
in the equality of men and women.
However, I have since learned that my comrades
and I have yet to overcome many of our backward ideas.
I believe there are some women in the party
who have the political strength
to maintain principled relationships
with men who do not belong to the party,
men, who although they may not necessarily
be potential party members are making a contribution
to the community.
Obviously just as the comrade brothers
in the party may find themselves sexually attracted
to women who are not in the party,
so do we women encounter men
in the community who attract us.
I do not deny that this is a chauvinist society.
Because I am an aggressive person,
I have suffered from male chauvinism all my life,
perhaps more so than less aggressive women
who nevertheless suffer just as I have and do.
I feel that both men and women party members
who elect to have sexual relationships
outside our party should do so with people who have ideals
and goals common to ours.
If they do not,
then the relationship is not only nonproductive.
It may, in the case of the comrade sister,
draw her away from the party
if she lacks political strength.
In the interests of the party, I believe that a body
of comrades should be designated to provide direction to men
and women party members who choose
to have relationships outside the party.
This way we maintain structure
as we do in all areas of our party.
My concern about male-female relationships
extends beyond the sexual aspect.
Ultimately, it will take a new
and humane society to alter the ways in which men
and women in America treat each other.
Within our party, it bothers me that there are a couple
of comrade brothers who still view women as sexual objects.
We should have no men
in the Black Panther Party who feel this way
or women for that matter.
It bothers me that there are a few brothers
who seem unable to carry a conversation with me
once I explain that I am not interested
in going to bed with them.
It makes me feel that,
it makes me feel that they feel I have no value
behind my body.
I realize that I made a ridiculous statement above,
when I said that my concern extends beyond the sexual aspect
of male-female relationships.
It is because of backwards ideas about the role
of men and the role of women that this whole problem exists.
I would like to see the party seriously begin
to deal with this issue.
While we have a number of women
in leadership positions in our party,
they are respected by the men
because they are in leadership.
I have seen time after time instances in which brothers,
not in the leadership, promptly carry out suggestions
made by women central body members
and ignore and often insult women
not on the central body who made the same suggestion.
This appalls me.
I do not hesitate to admit
that women are guilty of the same type of attitude
toward men who are not in the leadership.
The bottom line is that chauvinism exists in our party
to the extent that it does,
because we women tolerate it.
I'd actually like to leave you
with that chunk of quote from JoNina Abron,
and at this point not give you my opinion on it,
because I'd actually like to get some feedback
from you afterwards.
But essentially to close,
I think that as Black Panther Party women matured,
they had the presence of mind to understand
that a lot of the dilemmas that they faced were
in some instances linked to their position
in the party because they were a member.
But I think they also began to realize
that there were certain issues
that were separate and distinct from the things
that Black Panther Party men had to deal with.
Being female and being a mother placed them in a category
that was unique.
They neither used these distinctions as crutches
nor as the opportunity to practice one-upsmanship.
Instead, select female organizational planners made sure
that the party addressed the needs of its women
and children to the necessary degree
to keep the group functionally efficient.
There's so much more that I could say about the topic,
but today my intention was just to provide some information
that could serve as food for thought,
particularly for the individuals,
women and men who are involved in organizations
that force you to make decisions
for the common good but that have an impact on the lives
of a greater proportion of one group of members
than the other.
Black Panther Party women's history also reveals
that at the times when one's needs are not being met,
tough decisions have to be made.
In numerous cases, women who did not feel structurally
or emotionally supported left the group.
Others remained and fought within the structure
until their needs were met.
I think the most important thing to remember is,
Ericka Huggins said in the clip from the video is
that all these Black Panther Party members were human
whether they were male or female,
and the choices that they made were intensely as personal
as they were, excuse me, as they were public.
And I think the one thing that's clear is
that there's really no easy way to disassociate
the private from the public
and the personal from the political.
So I'd like to thank you
for your time and attention
and also open up for questions.
(audience applauds)
During the earliest years,
the babies for the revolution phase,
that's also the period when
because of all the outside law enforcement pressure,
there were lots of purges that were going on internally.
And a lot of men were expelled from the party,
because they were considered to be, you know,
agent provocateurs causing dissension.
And it was revealed in later testimony
that some of them were actually undercover policemen.
But a number of women were expelled
for the same reason that they were praised,
they were lauded and praised,
because they could attract men to the party,
make babies for the revolution.
And that became a tool that was used against them,
because the argument would be that, oh, you can tell
that this person, this woman is an agent provocateur
because since she's joined the party
all she's wanting to do is sleep with this leader
and that leader and the next person.
But I would have to say that during the earliest years,
the decisions to leave were very personal
in terms of childcare and wondering how they would care
for the children once the children were born.
During the later years, there were still a lot
of intraorganizational dissension going on,
particularly in 1977, when Huey Newton returned from Cuba,
he had been in Cuban exile from 1974 to '77
related to charges that he had pistol-whipped his tailor
and also that he had murdered,
he had shot and murdered a 14-year-old prostitute
in Oakland.
So when he returned,
according to Elaine Brown's autobiography
and some other interviews that I had done,
apparently a group of men who were considered the squad
or the brothers, sort of the strong-armers
in the party that supported Newton felt
that they finally had the opportunity to get rid
of all of these women who had been placed
in these leadership positions
when Elaine Brown took over in '74 after Huey Newton left.
And there are several reported cases of women being beaten
and raped actually and deciding to leave.
So that's not so much that,
I mean, to answer your question,
it's not so much that these beatings and such had
and these expulsions had a direct impact
on whether they could or couldn't have a child,
but rather it's sort of the larger context, right?
And especially with instances of rape, you know,
and I'm saying this, I don't mean to say
that every day there was a rape,
but even if there was one rape, you know,
that calls to question the nature of this organization
that's supposed to, you know,
practice equality between men and women.
Initially I think the assumption might be
that there was no relationship between the two,
but on the contrary, there was a large interaction
between the two groups, but especially here in the Bay Area.
And what I found is that a number
of Black Panther Party women,
for example JoNina Abron,
who was a newspaper editor
as well as a couple other members would attend events
that were billed as feminist events.
And they would, the Black Panther Party would advertise
these upcoming events.
And they would also include stories,
follow-up stories on the events in their newspaper.
One thing that comes to mind also is a lot
of organizing that happened around political prisoners
during the time,
and Ericka Huggins, the same woman on the video
was in prison in New Haven
between 1969 and 1971 charged for the murder
of one Black Panther Party member in the New Haven chapter.
And the National Welfare Rights Organization
as well as a number of grassroots feminist organizations
staunchly supported Ericka Huggins' case,
not because she was a Black Panther
but because she was a woman.
And she was arrested at the same time
with about eight other women,
I think about eight other women from the New Haven chapter,
a couple of whom had been pregnant when they were arrested.
So they had delivered the babies in prison,
and they had their babies removed from them.
So around the issue of motherhood
and incarceration is where they found that point
of entry to agree.
And actually one group,
I can't remember the name of it right now,
but they almost refused to join that particular movement
because in their mind the Black Panther Party was filled
with a bunch of egotistical macho individuals.
And they assumed that if they became involved
in this arm
of Black Panther Party's organizing
that the Black Panther Party would try
to take over their organization.
So there are also examples
of women who joined the Black Panther Party
in the search for their identity.
And after having about a year or so experience
with the Panthers and keeping their eyes
and ears open to the larger feminist movement
decided that they would prefer to be
in the feminist movement than in the Black Panther Party.
So there's a wide perspective,
but they definitely had interactions.
I think one thing that's really interesting is
when I interviewed a lot of these women
and I asked them
if they considered themselves feminists at the time,
they were almost offended
that I would even imply such a thing, because it's,
I think you remember from JoNina Abron's quote.
She said, you know, "I'm a Black woman,
"and I consider myself a Panther member
"before I consider myself a woman."
So there was always that tension.
Yes, about 90%
of them are still involved
in community organizing and community activism
in some shape or form, might be even higher than that.
The common theme that drew them
to the organization in 1968 in large numbers,
because they joined as early as 1967,
but they rallied to the organization in 1968
because of the increased community work
that was being done.
After the organization had moved
beyond the armed police patrols of the communities,
which a couple of women had been involved in,
that's when the women really became involved.
And to link my response to your question
with what Vera had asked me about violence,
intraorganizational violence,
a lot of women endured years of that kind of abuse,
because they were committed to the goals
of the Oakland Community School, more specifically,
and the education that the children received.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
(audience applauds)
(majestic orchestra music)